.. _event-processing:

################
Event processing
################

Introduction
============

|product_name| is event based monitoring system. Events can come from different
sources - polling processes (status, configuration, discovery), data collection,
:term:`SNMP` traps, from NXSL scripts and directly from external applications
via client library. All events are forwarded to |product_name| Event Queue. 

|product_name| Event Processor can process events from Event Queue in either
sequential or parallel mode. In sequential mode events are processed one-by-one
which guarantees that events will be processed in the same sequence as they
arrive into the queur. For installation where a lot of events could be generated
in a short period of time this mode can be a bottleneck. 

Parallel processing mode allows to process events in several parallel threads,
thus allowing to scale horizontally and to increase processing performance.
Number of threads for parallel processing is set by
:guilabel:`Events.Processor.PoolSize` server configuration parameter. 

Event Processing Rules can read/write persistent storage and custom attributes,
create/terminate alarms, can run scripts that are checking other node statuses
and care should be taken to ensure that no race condition would occur when
performing parallel processing.

Correct operation is ensured by properly setting
:guilabel:`Events.Processor.QueueSelector` server configuration parameter. This
parameter contains macros that are expanded when an event is created. Events
that have same QueueSelector string will be processed sequentially by one and
the same event processing thread, thus ensuring that there will be no race
condition between these events. 


Event Processing Policy
=======================

Actions taken by event processor for any specific event are determined by a set
of rules called :guilabel:`Event Processing Policy` (EPP).

Every rule has two parts - matching part (called :guilabel:`Condition` in the
rule configuration dialog), which determines if the rule is applicable to an
event, and action part, which defines actions to be taken for matched events.

Each event passes through all rules in the policy, so if it matches more than
one rule, actions specified in all matched rules will be executed. You can
change this behavior by setting Stop Processing flag on a rule. If this flag is
set for a rule and that rule is matched, subsequent rules (with higher rule
number) will not be processed.

:guilabel:`Event Processing Policy` rules are managed using :guilabel:`Event
Processing Policy Editor` available in :guilabel:`Configuration --> Event
Processing Policy`. 

Only one user of |product_name| server can access :guilabel:`Event Processing
Policy Editor` window at a time. Other users will receive ``Component locked``
error message when attempting to open this window. 

Changes made in :guilabel:`Event Processing Policy Editor` are applied at the
moment when ``Save`` button is clicked. 

.. figure:: _images/event_processing_policy.png

   Event Processing Policy Screen

To expand or collapse a rule, double click on its title or use
``Expand/collapse`` button on the right hand side of rule title. 

Event Processing Policy Editor window toolbar buttons have the following meaning
(from left to right): Add new rule, Save changes, Expand all, Collapse all,
Horizontal layout, Vertical layout, Cut rule, Copy rule, Paste rule, Delete
rule.

To create event policy rule, right click on entry before or after which new
Event Processing Policy should appear and select :guilabel:`Insert before` or
:guilabel:`Insert after`. Drag and drop can be used for rule reorganization.

.. figure:: _images/epp_context_menu.png

  Event Processing Policy item context menu

To edit Event Processing Policy's properties, click edit button in right corner
of an entry, or double-click text in Filter or Action text. 

.. figure:: _images/epp_edit_button.png

  Edit buttons

Properties of Event Processing Policy rule have the following sections:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Section
     - Description
   * - **Condition**
     - Sub-sections of **Condition** section determine if the rule is applicable
       to a particular event. If checkbox :guilabel:`Rule is disabled` is set,
       this rule is ignored. Checkbox :guilabel:`Accept correlated events`
       defines, if events, which are correlated to another events should be
       processed (e.g. when when node is in maintenance, all node events are
       correlated to the maintenance event).
   * - Condition --> Events
     - Event code. This field can be left empty, which matches any event, or
       contain list of applicable events. :guilabel:`Inverse rule` checkbox
       allows to react to all events except to thouse listed. 
   * - Condition --> Source Objects
     - Source objects and exclusions lists allow to specify for which objects
       this rule is applicable. If source objects list is empty, rule would
       match any object. 
       
       Multiple objects can be specified in the lists. If you
       specify subnet, container, collector, cluster, rack or chassis, any
       object within it will also be matched.
       
       If one and the same object is present both in source objects and
       exclusions, exclusions list has priority. E.g. you can specify a
       container in source objects and one specific node from that container in
       exclusions list - rule would match all nodes from that container except
       that one specified node. 
     
       :guilabel:`Inverse rule` checkbox allows to invert the logic, so objects
       that would be matched by given combination of source objects and
       exclusions will not be matched and vice versa.      
   * - Condition --> Time Filter
     - Allows to specify time frames when rule should be matched. Time frames
       allow to specify time range, days of week, days of month and months. Days
       of month are specified as comma-separated lists of days or ranges, e.g.
       `1,3,5,20-25`. Letter `L` denotes last day of month.        
   * - Condition --> Severity Filter
     - Event's severity. This field contains selection of event severities to be
       matched.
   * - Condition --> Filtering Script
     - Optional matching script written in NXSL. If this field is empty (or only
       contains comments according to NXSL language specification), no
       additional checks are performed. Otherwise, the event will be considered
       as matched only if the script returns boolean ``true`` (or other value
       that is considered true in NXSL language, e.g. non-zero number or array).
       For more information about |product_name| scripting language please refer
       to the chapter :ref:`scripting` in this manual.

       **Note**\ : Script execution is a blocking operation - event processor
       will wait for the script to complete. Make sure that script is written in
       a way that it would execute quickly.
   * - **Action**
     - Sub-sections of **Action** section determine what actions are performed
       if an event meets all conditions of a rule. If checkbox :guilabel:`Stop
       event processing` is set, then subsequent rules (with higher rule number)
       will not be processed for a given event. However, actions of given rule
       will be performed. 
   * - Action --> Alarm
     - Action in regard to alarms. Alarm can be created, resolved or terminated
       or no action to alarms is done. See
       :ref:`generating_and_terminating_alarms` for more information. 
   * - Action --> Downtime Control
     - Allows to add records to ``downtime_log`` table in the DB which can later
       be used to generate downtime report using the reporting engine. Downtime
       tag allows to specify several types of downtime for one and the same
       object. When closing a downtime record, system will search for open
       record with same downtime tag. Downtime tag is 15 characters in length,
       macros are not supported in this field. 
   * - Action --> Persistent Storage
     - :ref:`nxsl_persistent_storage` action like add/update or delete can be
       performed.
   * - Action --> Custom Attributes
     - Actions with :ref:`custom_attributes` like add/update or delete can be
       performed.
   * - Action --> Server Actions
     - List of predefined actions to be executed. Action execution could be
       delayed with ability to cancel a delayed action later on. Execution of
       action could be snoozed for a specified period of time. For action
       configuration refer to :ref:`actions` chapter. Delayed execution and
       snoozing is controlled using timers which can be referred to using timer
       key. This allows cancelling a timer or checking, if its still running
       from NXSL script. 
   * - Action --> Script
     - Script writen in NXSL. 
       
       **Note**\ : Script execution is a blocking operation - event processor
       will wait for the script to complete. Make sure that script is written in
       a way that it would execute quickly. If you need to execute a
       long-running script, create `Execute NXSL script action` and execute it
       from EPP rule. 
   * - Action --> Timer Cancellations
     - List of timers to cancel identified by timer keys. This allows to cancel
       delayed actions and snooze/blocking timers.
   * - Comments
     - Rule comment which can be multi-line text. The comment is displayed as a
       name of the rule.

**After all manipulations are done - save changes by pressing save icon.**

Examples
--------

This rule defines that for every major or critical event originated from a
node named "IPSO" two e-mail actions will be executed.

.. figure:: _images/EPP_rule_config_example_1.png

   Example 1


.. _events:

Events
======







.. _alarms:

Alarms
======

Alarms Overview
---------------

As a result of event processing some events can be shown up as alarms. Usually
alarm represents something that needs attention of network administrators or
network control center operators, for example low free disk space on a server.

All alarm events are logged to alarm log. The number of days the server keeps
alarm history can be configured by "AlarmHistoryRetentionTime" server
configuration parameter. Alarm log can be viewed in "Alarm Log View"(Alt+F8).
This view gives option to query for required information from alarm log. 

.. figure:: _images/alarm_log.png

Every alarm has the following attributes:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Attribute
     - Description
   * - Creation time
     - Time when alarm was created.
   * - Last change time
     - Time when alarm was last changed (for example, acknowledged).
   * - State
     - Current state of the alarm, see table bellow
   * - Message
     - Message text (usually derived from originating event's message text).
   * - Severity
     - Alarm's severity - :guilabel:`Normal`, :guilabel:`Warning`,
       :guilabel:`Minor`, :guilabel:`Major`, or :guilabel:`Critical`.
   * - Source
     - Source node (derived from originating event).
   * - Key
     - Text string used to identify duplicate alarms and for automatic alarm
       termination.


Possible alarm states:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25 75

   * - Outstanding
     - New alarm.
   * - Acknowledged
     - When network administrator sees an alarm, he may acknowledge it to
       indicate that somebody already aware of that problem and working on it.
       A new event with the same alarm ID will reset the alarm state back to
       outstanding
   * - Sticky Acknowledged for time
     - Alarm will remain acknowledged for given time interval even after new
       matching events, after time will pass alarm will be moved to outstanding
       state. This option can be used like snooze. When you know that there will
       be new matching events, but it will not change the situation. But after
       some time someone should check this problem. For example, if you have
       problem that cannot be solved until next week, so this alarm can be
       sticky acknowledged for 7 days. After 7 days this problem again will be
       in outstanding state. This type of acknowledge can be disabled by changing
       :guilabel:`EnableTimedAlarmAck` server configuration parameter.
   * - Sticky Acknowledged
     - Alarm will remain acknowledged event after new matching events. This can
       be useful when you know that there will be new matching events, but it
       will not change the situation. For example, if you have network device
       which will send new SNMP trap every minute until problem solved, sticky
       acknowledge will help to eliminate unnecessary outstanding alarms.
   * - Resolved
     - Network administrator sets this state when the problem is solved.
   * - Terminated
     - Inactive alarm. When problem is solved, network administrator can
       terminate alarm. This will remove alarm from active alarms list and it
       will not be seen in Management Client, but alarm record will remain in
       database.


There are 2 types of alarm state flows: strict and not strict. This option can
be configured in Preference page of Alarms or on server configuration page,
parameter "StrictAlarmStatusFlow". The difference between them is that in strict
mode Terminate can be done only after Resolve state.



.. figure:: _images/AlarmStatesTransitionsInvokedByUser-NOTstrict.png
   :scale: 60%

   Not strict(default)


.. figure:: _images/AlarmStatesTransitionsInvokedByUser-strict.png
   :scale: 60%

   Strict

Alarm Melodies
--------------

On each severity of alarm can be set melody to play. This melody will be played
when new alarm in state outstanding will occur. Melody that should be played
should exist on server in wav format. See instruction there:
:ref:`upload-file-on-server-label`. By default there are no sounds on alarms.

To set sound open preferences, there select :menuselection:`Alarms --> Alarm
Sounds` tab. There in drop-down will be seen all possible options. If sound will
not be chosen, alarm with this severity will come silently.

To configure sounds, open preferences and select :menuselection:`Alarms -->
Alarm Sounds` tab. Drop-downs next to each severity level have a list of
available sounds. If no sound is chosen, alarm for given severity will come
silently.


.. figure:: _images/Alarm_Sound_Preferences.png

Alarm Browser
-------------

When an alarm is generated it will appear in the Alarm Browser where information
about currently active alarms can be viewed.

.. figure:: _images/alarm_browser.png

Alarm Comments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For each alarm can be created comments in "Alarm Details"

.. figure:: _images/alarm_details_comments.png

or "Alarm Comments" views.

.. figure:: _images/alarm_comments.png

Comment can be created, edited or deleted. All comments will be deleted after
alarm termination.

Alarm Summary Emails
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is possible to schedule emails which contain a summary of all currently
active alarms, similar to what can be seen in the Alarm Browser.

Summary emails are sent through SMTP notification channel with HTML formatting.
It should be first configured in :ref:`notification-channels` configuration and
then it's name should be set in "DefaultNotificationChannel.SMTP.Html" server
configuration parameter.

To enable Alarm Summary Emails it is required to configure the following server
parameters:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 25
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Name
   * - DefaultNotificationChannel.SMTP.Html
   * - EnableAlarmSummaryEmails
   * - AlarmSummaryEmailSchedule
   * - AlarmSummaryEmailRecipients


Further information on server configuration parameters can be found in
:ref:`server_configuration_parameters`.

.. _generating_and_terminating_alarms:

Generating and Terminating Alarms from EPP
------------------------------------------

To generate alarms from events, you should edit :guilabel:`Alarm` field in
appropriate rule of :guilabel:`Event Processing Policy`. Alarm configuration
dialog will look like this:

.. figure:: _images/Alarm_config.png

You should select :guilabel:`Generate new alarm` radio button to enable alarm
generation from current rule. In the :guilabel:`Message` field enter alarm's
text, and in the alarm key enter value which will be used for repeated alarms
detection and automatic alarm termination. In both fields you can use macros
described in the :ref:`event-processing-macros` section.

You can also configure sending of additional event if alarm will stay in
:guilabel:`Outstanding` state for given period of time. To enable this, enter
desired number of seconds in :guilabel:`Seconds` field, and select event to be
sent. Entering value of ``0`` for seconds will disable additional event
sending.

Alarms generated by rules can by categorised to limit what alarms can be seen by
what users. This can be done by applying a category in the :guilabel:`Alarm
Category` field, which can be created and configured in the
:ref:`alarm-category-config`.

.. _alarm-category-config:

Alarm Category Configurator
---------------------------

Alarm categories can be created and configured in the :guilabel:`Alarm Category
Configurator` which can be found in :menuselection:`Configuration --> Alarm
Category Configurator` menu:

.. figure:: _images/Alarm_category_config.png

   Alarm Category Configurator

Alarm categories provide the possibility to configure access rights for viewing
generated alarms on a per user or per group basis. When creating an alarm
category, it is possible to set the :guilabel:`Category name`,
:guilabel:`Description`.

.. figure:: _images/Alarm_category_properties.png

	Alarm Category properties

Alarm category access rights can be configured by adding users or groups to the
access list of the category in the :guilabel:`Access Control` property page.

.. figure:: _images/Alarm_category_access.png

	Alarm Category Access Control

By default, all alarms can be viewed by all users due to the :guilabel:`View all
alarms` system right being set as default to the :guilabel:`Everyone` user
group. In order to limit the viewing of alarms, this system right should be
removed and the access rights configured in the categories themselves. When the
categories have been configured, they can be applied to the necessary
:guilabel:`Event Processing Policy` rules.

If an alarm category has been applied to an :guilabel:`Event Processing Policy`
rule, it will appear in the :guilabel:`Event Processing Policy Editor` when a
rule is expanded under the :guilabel:`Action` section.

.. figure:: _images/EPP_rule_expanded.png

	Event Processing Policy expanded


Automatic Alarm Termination/Resolve
-----------------------------------

You can terminate or resolve all active alarms with given key as a reaction for
the event. To do this, select :guilabel:`Terminate alarm` radio button or
:guilabel:`Resolve alarm` radio button in alarm configuration dialog and enter
value for alarm key. For that field you can use macros described in the
:ref:`event-processing-macros` chapter.


Escalation
----------

As it was described in :ref:`generating_and_terminating_alarms` chapter there is
possibility to generate new event if alarm stay in :guilabel:`Outstanding` state
for too long. Escalation is built on this option. When alarm was generated, but
no action was done from operator in predefined time, new event can be generated
and this time email or notification (SMS, instant message) can be sent to
operator or to it's manager. This escalation process can have as many steps as
it is required.


.. _actions:

Actions
=======

In addition to alarm generation server can perform various types of actions as a
reaction to an event. Action types available in |product_name| are described in
the following sections. Each action can be separately disabled in action
configuration.

After the action is added, it can be edited to add delay time and timer key.
This option can be used to prevent notification sending in case if problem
solved quickly enough. Key is a free form string that supports
:ref:`macros<event-processing-macros>` and delay is the delay time in seconds
before action is executed.

The following example shows the configuration for the situation when there is no
need to notify anyone if node went down and back up in less then 5 minutes.

.. figure:: _images/delayed_action.png


If, in adddition, we want to send notification when node goes up, but only if
notification about node down was sent: 

.. figure:: _images/delayed_action_2.png


Escalation
----------

One :term:`EPP` rule can contain multiple actions with different delays. Delay
timers are canceled by other rule in case of problem resolution.

The next example shows that if node went down, then
   #. after 1 minute responsible person will be notified if the problem still
      persists
   #. after 30 minutes the support manager will be notified if the problem still
      persists
   #. after 1 hour the IT manager will be notified if the problem still persists

.. figure:: _images/delayed_action_escalation.png

Action types
------------

Execute command on management server
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Executes provided command on server node. Check that user under which
:file:`netxmsd` process run has permission to run this command.

.. _action-remote-execute:

Execute command on remote node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Executes provided command name defined in this nodes agent configuration file.
To this command can be given parameters in format: ``commandName param1 param2
param3...`` Check that user under which :file:`nxagentd` process run has
permission to run this command.

As the :guilabel:`Remote Host` can be used hostname or object name(int format:
``@objectName``). Second option allows action execution on node behind proxy.


Send notification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Send notification, e.g. SMS, MicrosoftTeams, e-mail etc, to one or more recipients. This can be configured in Notification channels section described below and appropriate action created in Actions section and then available for use in EPP.
Driver configuration parameters are detailed in Drivers section.

In message text can be used :ref:`event-processing-macros`.

.. figure:: _images/event_processing_notification.png

Execute NXSL script
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This action executes script form scrip library. In action configuration should
be defined name of script. Information about scripting and library can be found
:ref:`there<scripting>`.


.. _forward_events:

Forward event
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

|product_name| does not support configuration synchronization between two
|product_name| servers(Distributed Monitoring). But it is possible to forward
events from one server to another. This option allow synchronize events between
servers but there are some limitation.


Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Source server configuration:
  1. Create new action of type "forward event" - it will have destination server
     address property.
  2. Create a rule in event processing policy with filter for events you want to
     forward and add forwarding action as action.

Destination server configuration:
  1. Enable EnableISCListener and ReceiveForwardedEvents in server configuration.
  2. Open port 4702.
  3. Check that receiving server have all events as on a sending server


Limitation
^^^^^^^^^^

Limitations of event forwarding:
  1. Event template with same event code or event name must exist on recipient
     server
  2. Node object with same IP address as event's source node's address must
     exist on recipient server
  3. Does not work with zones

Events not met these conditions are discarded. It is possible to check if and
why incoming events are discarded by turning on level 5 debug on receiving
server.

There can be used one of two options if it is required to disable polling of
sender server nodes on recipient server: disable all polling protocols or
unmanage nodes. Chose  depends on how you wish to see node's status. For
unmanaged node, it always be "unmanaged", regardless of active alarms. If you
disable polling, node's status will be "unknown" unless there will be active
alarms for that node - in that case node's status will change to severity of
most critical alarm.


.. _notification-channels:

Notification channels
---------------------

|product_name| supports concept of notification channel drivers to provide SMS
and instant message sending functionality. Role of notification channel driver
is to provide level of abstraction on top of different notification sending
mechanisms and uniform notification sending interface for server core. It is
possible to set up and use several notification channels.

Configuration of notification channels is done in :menuselection:`Configuration
--> Notification channels`.

.. figure:: _images/notification_channel_properties.png

Notification channel driver parameters are specified in :guilabel:`Driver
configuration` input field. Each parameter is given on a separate line in
format: :guilabel:`parameter_name=parameter_value`. Meaning of parameters is
driver dependent and described separately for each driver. It a parameter is not
given, it's default value will be used.

Once notification channel is created is is seen in channel list with green or
read square next to the name - it is channel status identifier. It should be
green if driver initialization was successful or read in other cases.
:guilabel:`Status` column displays last sent attempt status and :guilabel:`Error
message` column provide more information about driver initialization or sending
error.

.. figure:: _images/notification_channels.png


Drivers
~~~~~~~

The following drivers are provided by default with |product_name| installation:

.. list-table::
   :class: longtable
   :widths: 25 75
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Driver
     - Description
   * - AnySMS
     - SMS driver for any-sms.biz service (`<http://any-sms.biz>`_).
       Configuration parameters:

       * login (default: user)
       * password (default: password)
       * sender (default: NETXMS)
       * gateway (default: 28)

   * - DBTable
     - This driver saves notifications to a database. Configuration parameters:

       * DBDriver (default: sqlite.ddr)
       * DBName (default: netxms)
       * DBLogin (default: netxms)
       * DBPassword
       * DBServer (default: localhost)
       * DBSchema
       * MaxMessageLength (default: 255)
       * MaxNumberLength (default: 32)
       * QueryTemplate

   * - Dummy
     - Dummy driver for debugging purposes. Does not send any actual
       notifications and only logs them to server log file. This driver has no
       configuration parameters. It is necessary to set debug level to
       :guilabel:`debug=6` or higher to get records in the log file.

   * - Google chat
     - Driver to send notifications to Google charts. You need to create
       `incoming web hook first
       <https://developers.google.com/chat/how-tos/webhooks>`_. Each web hook
       have it’s own URL, you can either put it as recipient, or setup mapping
       in notification channel configuration.
       
       Mapping is done in the section "Rooms". 
      
       Example:

       .. code-block:: ini

            [Rooms]
            RoomName=URL
            AnotherRoomName=URL

   * - GSM
     - Driver for serial or USB attached GSM modems with support for standard
       GSM AT command set. Configuration parameters:

       * BlockSize (default: 8)
       * DataBits (default: 8)
       * Parity (default: n)
       * Port (default: COM1: on Windows platforms, /dev/ttyS0 on other
         platforms)
       * Speed (default: 9600)
       * StopBits (default: 1)
       * TextMode (1 - text mode, 0 - PDU mode, default: 1)
       * UseQuotes (1 - use quotes, 0 - do not use quotes, default: 1)
       * WriteDelay (default: 100)

   * - Kannel
     - Driver for Kannel SMS gateway (`<http://www.kannel.org>`_). Configuration
       parameters:

       * login (default: user)
       * password (default: password)
       * host (default: 127.0.0.1)
       * port (default: 13001)

   * - Mattermost
     - Mattermost online chat service driver. Configuration parameters:

       * AuthToken ( required, example: f6ern7edy3ma9gtg9zdhaks9aw )
       * Color
       * Footer
       * ServerURL ( required, example: your.mattermost.server.fqdn )
       * UseAttachments
   * - MicrosoftTeams
     - Notification channel driver for Microsoft Teams. Configuration
       parameters:

       * ThemeColor - team color in RGB, default: FF6A00 (optional parameter)
       * UseMessageCards - flag if message cards should be used, default: no
         (optional parameter)

       Optional configuration section "Channels" should contain list of channels
       in the following format: channelName=URL, where channelName is an
       arbitrary name later used as recipient in action configuration. More
       information about setting up the URL of incoming webhook available `there
       <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoftteams/platform/webhooks-and-connectors/how-to/connectors-using#setting-up-a-custom-incoming-webhook>`_

       .. code-block:: ini

            #config example
            ThemeColor=FF6A00
            UseMessageCards = false

            [Channels]
            Channel=URL
            AnotherChannel=URL

       MsTeams requires 2 fields in action configuration:

       * Recipient name - channel name defined in :guilabel:`Channels` section
         or incoming webhook URL
       * Message - message to be sent

   * - MQTT
     - Driver for sending messages to MQTT broker. Sending is done by
       |product_name| server process. When sending, MQTT topic is specified in
       recipient field, value in message body field. Configuration parameters:

       * hostname (default: 127.0.0.1)
       * port (defalut: 1883)
       * login 
       * password 

   * - MyMobile
     - SMS driver for MyMobile API gateways. Configuration parameters:

       * username
       * password

   * - Nexmo
     - SMS driver for Nexmo gateway. Configuration parameters:

       * apiKey (default: key)
       * apiSecret (default: secret)
       * from (default: NetXMS)

   * - NXAgent
     - Similar to gsm.ncd, but sending is done via GSM modem, attached to
       |product_name| agent. Configuration parameters:

       * hostname (default localhost)
       * port (default: 4700)
       * timeout (seconds, default: 30)
       * secret
       * encryption - optional parameter. Encryption policy:

            0 = Encryption disabled;

            1 = Encrypt connection only if agent requires encryption;

            2 = Encrypt connection if agent supports encryption;

            3 = Force encrypted connection;

       * keyFile - optional parameter. Specify server's key file, if not
         specified will take default path.

   * - Portech
     - Driver for Portech MV-372 and MV-374 GSM gateways
       (`<https://www.portech.com.tw/p3-product1_1.asp?Pid=14>`_). Configuration
       parameters:

       * host (default: 10.0.0.1)
       * secondaryHost
       * login (default: admin)
       * password (default: admin)
       * mode (PDU or TEXT, default: PDU)

   * - Shell
     - Driver executes shell commands on the server. Configuration parameter:

       * Command

       In the command ${recipient}, ${subject} and ${text} macros will be
       correspondingly replaced with values of recipient, subject and text. 

   * - Slack
     - Driver for slack.com service. Configuration parameters:

       * url
       * username

   * - SMSEagle
     - Driver for SMSEagle Hardware SMS Gateway. Configuration parameters:

       * host (default: 127.0.0.1)
       * port (defalut: 80)
       * login (default: user)
       * password (default: password)
       * https (1 - use https, 0 - do not use https)

   * - SMTP
     - Driver to send notifications using SMTP protocol. Encryption and
       authentication are supported. Driver is using libcurl library to send
       emails. Mail encoding is always utf8. 

       * FromAddr (default: netxms@localhost)
       * FromName (default: NetXMS Server)
       * IsHTML (no - do not use HTML, yes - use HTML; default: no)
       * Login (default: none)
       * Password (default: none). Passwords encrypted by
         :ref:`nxencpasswd-tools-label` are supported. If password provided by
         your email service is 44- or 88-character base64 string, it will be
         interpreted as a password encrypted by ``nxencpasswd``, in this case
         encrypt password provided by your email service with ``nxencpasswd``.
       * Port (default: 465 if TLSMode=TLS, 25 otherwise))
       * Server (default: localhost)
       * TLSMode (NONE - No TLS (default), TLS - Enforced TLS, STARTTLS -
         Opportunistic TLS)

   * - SNMPTrap
     - Driver to send notifications as SNMP traps. Driver configuration
       parameters:

       * Community (default: public)
       * Port (default: 162)
       * ProtocolVersion (possible values: 1, 2c, 3; default: 2c)

       Driver configuration parameters applicable to SNMP v3 only:

       * AuthMethod (possible values: none, sha1, sha224, sha256, sha384,
         sha512; default: none)
       * AuthPassword
       * PrivMethod (possible values: none, aes, des; default: none)
       * PrivPassword
       * UseInformRequest (default: false) 
       * UserName (default: netxms)

       Raden Solutions has IANA assigned Private Enterprise Number (57163).
       MIB files defining the OIDs (RADENSOLUTIONS-SMI.txt and NETXMS-MIB.txt)
       are included with |product_name| server. It's also possible to use custom 
       OIDs by setting the following driver configuration parameters:

       * AdditionalDataFieldID (default: .1.3.6.1.4.1.57163.1.1.6.0)
       * AlarmKeyFieldID (default: .1.3.6.1.4.1.57163.1.1.5.0)
       * MessageFieldID (default: .1.3.6.1.4.1.57163.1.1.3.0)
       * SeverityFieldID (default: .1.3.6.1.4.1.57163.1.1.2.0)
       * SourceFieldID (default: .1.3.6.1.4.1.57163.1.1.1.0)
       * TimestampFieldID (default: .1.3.6.1.4.1.57163.1.1.4.0)
       * TrapID (default: .1.3.6.1.4.1.57163.1.0.1)

       Recipient's address should contain host name or IP address the trap is sent to. 
       Message and subject are sent as separate fields (MessageFieldID and 
       AdditionalDataFieldID) in the trap message. 
       In addition to that, if subject contains semicolon-separated key=value 
       pairs or JSON and the key is from below list, additional fields 
       with these values will be added to trap message. List of supported keys:
      
        * key         - alarm key
        * source      - source object name
        * severity    - event severity (integer in range 0..4)
        * timestamp   - original even timestamp as UNIX time

       E.g. subject could be ``key=%K;source=%n;severity=%s;timestamp=%T``. 
       Subject field could be generated using NXSL script that is called using 
       ``%[script_name]`` macro. This is convenient for generating JSON. 
       
       JSON data can have more fields in addition to the above mentioned, this
       allows to send more information in the trap. 

   * - Telegram
     - Notification channel driver for Telegram messenger. Configuration
       parameters:

       * AuthToken
       * DisableIPv4 - ``true`` to disable IPv4 usage
       * DisableIPv6 - ``true`` to disable IPv6 usage
       * ParseMode - Text formatting style: ``Markdown``, ``HTML`` or
         ``MarkdownV2``. See Telegram API documentation on formatting syntax:
         https://core.telegram.org/bots/api#formatting-options
       * Proxy - proxy url or ip or full configuration if format
         [scheme]://[login:password]@IP:[PORT]
       * ProxyPort - proxy port
       * ProxyType - proxy type: ``http``, ``https``, ``socks4``, ``socks4a``,
         ``socks5`` or ``socks5h``
       * ProxyUser - proxy user name
       * ProxyPassword - proxy user password

       Only AuthToken field is mandatory field all others are optional.

       It is necessary to create a telegram bot that |product_name| server will
       use to send messages. In order to create a new bot it's necessary to talk
       to BotFather and get bot authentication token (AUTH_TOKEN). Set
       authentication token in notification channel configuration, e.g.:
       ``AuthToken=1234567890:jdiAiwdisUsWjvKpDenAlDjuqpx``

       The bot can:

       * Have a private chat with another Telegram user
       * Participate a group
       * Be channel admin

       Telegram's bot can't initiate conversations with users in a private chat
       or a group. A user must either add bot to a group or send a private
       message to the bot first.

       Chat, group or channel is identified by ID or name (without @ prefix).
       For private chats only users who configured a Username can be identified
       by name (without @ prefix). |product_name| stores the correspondence
       between ID and name when the bot receives a message in chat or group
       (|product_name| server should be running a that moment). If group,
       channel name or username is changed, it's necessary to send any message
       to the bot so new correspondence could be stored.

       Telegram notification channel requires 2 fields in action configuration:

       * Recipient name - It could be name (of a group, channel or username,
         without @ prefix) or ID of group, channel or chat.
       * Message - text that should be sent

       If you want to use ID to identify a recipient, you can get it by opening
       Telegram API URL in your browser, e.g.
       https://api.telegram.org/bot1234567890:jdiAiwdisUsWjvKpDenAlDjuqpx/getUpdates
       After sending a message to the bot or adding it to a group you should see
       chat id there. You might need to temporary deconfigure Telegram
       notification channel, otherwise if |product_name| server is running, it
       will read data from Telegram API first.


   * - Text2Reach
     - Driver for Text2Reach.com service (`<http://www.text2reach.com>`_).
       Configuration parameters:

       * apikey (default: apikey)
       * from (default: from)
       * unicode (1 or 0, default: 1)
       * blacklist (1 or 0, default: 0)

   * - TextFile
     - Notification driver that writes messages to text file. Configuration
       parameter:

       * OutputFile - path to file.

   * - Twilio
     - Driver for Twilio.com service (`<http://www.twilio.com>`_). Configuration
       parameters:

       * CallerId - caller ID
       * SID - account SID (for authentication)
       * Token - account security token (for authentication)
       * Voice - voice to be used for Text To Speech (man, woman, alice, or any
         of the Amazon Polly voices. See here for more information
         https://www.twilio.com/docs/voice/twiml/say#voice)
       * UseTTS - true/false, enable or disable Text To Speech (default is
         false)

   * - WebSMS
     - Driver for websms.ru service (`<https://websms.ru>`_). Configuration
       parameters:

       * login (default: user)
       * password (default: password)
       * m_fromPhone

   * - XMPP
     - Driver for XMPP/Jabber messages. Configuration parameters:

       * Server (default: localhost)
       * Port (default: user)
       * Login - may or may not contain XMPP domainpart. If no domainpart is
         specified server name will be added to login. (default:
         netxms@localhost)  
       * m_fromPhone (default: 5222)


.. _nxsl_persistent_storage:

NXLS Persistent Storage
=======================

NXSL
----

There are 2 functions:
    - ReadPersistentStorage("key") - read value by key
    - WritePersistentStorage("key", "value") - insert or update value by key. If
      value will be empty - variable will be deleted.

View
----

:guilabel:`Persistent Storage` view (:menuselection:`Configuration -->
Persistent Storage`) provide information about current state of Persistent
Storage variables.

.. figure:: _images/pstorage.png

.. _event-processing-macros:

Macros for Event Processing
===========================

On various stages of event processing you may need to use macros to include
information like event source, severity, or parameter in your event texts,
alarms, or actions. You may use the following macros to accomplish this:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 35 65
   :header-rows: 1
   :class: longtable

   * - Macro
     - Description
   * - ``%a``
     - IP address of event source object.
   * - ``%A``
     - Alarm's text. This macro is populated when creating, resolving or
       terminating alarm in EPP rule. Macro is available in that EPP rule for
       persistent storage and server action and in subsequent EPP rules.

       .. versionchanged:: 3.8.314

       Prior to 3.8.314 this macro was available only withing given EPP rule.

   * - ``%c``
     - Event's code.
   * - ``%C``
     - Comment of event source object. 

       .. versionadded:: 4.4.3
   * - ``%D``
     - Comment of Data Collection Item (only for threshold violation events)
       
       .. versionadded:: 4.4.3
   * - ``%E``
     - List of comma-separated user tags associated with the event.     
   * - ``%g``
     - Globally unique identifier (GUID) of event source object.
   * - ``%i``
     - Unique ID of event source object in hexadecimal form. Always prefixed
       with 0x and contains exactly 8 digits (for example 0x000029AC).
   * - ``%I``
     - Unique ID of event source object in decimal form.
   * - ``%K``
     - Alarm's key (can be used only in actions to put text of alarm from the
       same event processing policy rule).
   * - ``%L``
     - Alias of event source object.
       
       .. versionadded:: 4.4.3
   * - ``%m``
     - Event's message text (meaningless in event template).
   * - ``%M``
     - Custom message text. Can be set in filtering script by setting
       ``CUSTOM_MESSAGE`` variable.
   * - ``%n``
     - Name of event source object. Name of interface when interface name is
       generated using macros.
   * - ``%N``
     - Event's name.
   * - ``%s``
     - Event's severity code as number. Possible values are:

         - 0 - :guilabel:`Normal`
         - 1 - :guilabel:`Warning`
         - 2 - :guilabel:`Minor`
         - 3 - :guilabel:`Major`
         - 4 - :guilabel:`Critical`
   * - ``%S``
     - Event's severity code as text.
   * - ``%t``
     - Event's timestamp is a form day-month-year hour:minute:second.
   * - ``%T``
     - Event's timestamp as a number of seconds since epoch (as returned by
       `time() <http://linux.die.net/man/2/time>`_ function).
   * - ``%v``
     - |product_name| server's version.
   * - ``%z``
     - Zone UIN of event source object.
   * - ``%Z``
     - Zone name of event source object.
   * - ``%[name]``
     - Value returned by script. You should specify name of the script from
       script library. It's possible to specify script entry point separating it
       by ``/``, e.g. to call a function named ``calculate``:
       ``%[name/calculate]``. Script parameters can be specified in brackets,
       e.g.: ``%[name(123,"A textual parameter")]``
   * - ``%{name}``
     - Value of custom attribute. Expansion is attempted in the following order:

        #. If information about a DCI is available during expansion (when
           processing threshold violation event or if macro is used in a field
           in DCI properties), custom attribute ``name::instance`` is taken,
           where ``instance`` is instance of a DCI.
        #. If above custom attribute is not found, ``name`` custom attribute is
           taken. 
       
       If custom attribute exists, but has empty value, this empty value is
       taken (if this macro is used in a place where its value is converted to
       numeric value - e.g. as threshold value for a numeric DCI - then empty
       value will be converted to 0).
   * - ``%{name:default_value}``
     - Value of custom attribute. Expansion is attempted in the following order:

         #. If information about a DCI is available during expansion (when
            processing threshold violation event or if macro is used in a field
            in DCI properties), custom attribute ``name::instance`` is taken,
            where ``instance`` is instance of a DCI.
         #. If above custom attribute is not found, ``name`` custom attribute is
            taken.
         #. If above custom attribute is not found, ``default_value`` is taken. 
       
       If custom attribute exists, but has empty value, this empty value is
       taken (if this macro is used in a place where its value is converted to
       numeric value - e.g. as threshold value for a numeric DCI - then empty
       value will be converted to 0).
   * - ``%<name>``
     - Event's parameter with given name.
   * - ``%<{format-specifier}name>``
     - Formatted event's parameter with given name. This is applicable to DCI
       value and threshold value parameters. ``format-specifier`` is
       comma-separated list supporting the following options:

         - ``units`` - add measurement units from DCI's properties. For
           :guilabel:`Epoch` time and :guilabel:`Uptime` this will also convert
           the value.  
         - ``u`` - same as ``units``
         - ``multipliers`` - display values with multipliers (e.g. 1230000
           becomes 1.23 M)
         - ``m`` - same as ``multipliers``
   * - ``%1`` - ``%99``
     - Event's parameter number 1 .. 99.
   * - ``%%``
     - Insert ``%`` character.

If you need to insert special characters (like carriage return) you can use the
following notations:

+--------+--------------------------------+
| Char   | Description                    |
+========+================================+
| ``\t`` | Tab Character (0x09)           |
+--------+--------------------------------+
| ``\n`` | New line, CR/LF character pair |
+--------+--------------------------------+
| ``\\`` | Backslash character            |
+--------+--------------------------------+
